all right this is the June 18th 2024
meeting of the town of Andover Charter
revision
commission called to order at 6:05 PM we
have present myself jod gross Carol Lee
Patricia Bings Jeff Maguire and Adrien
mandaville we have one member of the
public who's on phone and muted could
you please unmute and identify yourself
for the
[Music]
record hi this is Shannon
lden thank you
Shannon all right that takes us to item
two on the
agenda which is public
speak attorney Lowden do you have
anything to say to
contribute the only thing I want to say
is I believe you're talking this evening
about the position of the town clerk
being either elected or appointed and my
two senses to continue to have it to be
an elected position I think that's very
important so that more people get a say
in the decision rather than leading it
up to a few people who might have a beef
or be disgruntled with a particular town
clerk I'm not speaking about Carol um so
that there are more people who have a
say in who our town clerk is going to be
and it's a very important decision in
our town thanks and thank you very much
for your
work thank you for your
input if there's no other public speak
any of the members of the commission
want to enter public speak or not if not
then we will move on to item three which
is approval of minutes do we have any
new minutes to approve
approve haven't seen anything Carol you
got to
unmute from last week on Jody sent us
from last week yeah I did I sent them
out right after the meeting right after
yes
okay let me just bring up my copy of
that then
give me a
moment right there we go let me know if
it'd be easier if I pulled it up and
just thumb through it quick for this
committee well you could why don't you
do that okay let me just
611 and I'll share
screen share
[Music]
and okay put this to the
side the Mac for my friend Adrian over
there um uh basically we had everyone
but Adrian unfortunately couldn't join
us started at
604 we approved the minutes from the
prior three meetings and the special
meeting it's public speak not public
Peak ah thank
you we go spelling wasn't part of this
job description I guess well Peak is a
word so it passes the spell test didn't
pick me up um we had discussion and
action on a charter review issues Jeff
uh really provided us some language uh
right before the meeting and um Carol
suggested adding some language to what
Jeff had or in conjunction with it that
Hein has to um to put an item into
town on a town
referendum um if there's some sort of
petition or
stay uh if petitioned to referendum then
ordinance would stay to that referendum
to the next town election and so Jeff
was going to rework some language and
send around to the
committee uh Item B was around
referendum
voting and again trying to have some
alignment with the Board of Ed and
budget timing with Hein Carol would need
to move up up the dates Carol verbally
walked through some modifications and
we'll send around to the committee which
I think she did she kind of had yellow
and red different denoting different
sort of
modifications uh we had some discussion
on not having a first selectman but
instead more of a chairperson or they
would still be first Selectmen but how I
interpreted it at the time um it would
be really the the concept here is they
would be um appointed from the board of
Selectmen as the first Selectmen like
the Board of Education and board of uh
Finance Bob shared language to the
Charter to make this modification in
line with moving forward from an elected
to an appointed first selectman got it
so that's really that was the key um we
didn't there was no motion or anything
on that one uh increased the number of
candidates Allowed by the board of
Selectmen the prior meeting I had given
some information on that uh discussion
on removing the limit of the number of
individuals on the party we discussed
the possibility of changing the number
of people an individual could vote for
um and then I wrote a note hold this
issue until of first
selectman or
chairperson concept appointed by the
board itself resolved uh Town Clark
position uh and this new trigger for
Town referendum we didn't go for we
didn't we didn't really get into because
Adrian wasn't there public speak we had
and then Jeff and Bob adjourned so those
were essentially the
minutes the only thing I wanted to ask
is about putting in that paragraph that
I had well that sentence that I
suggested for Section
10008 the review and Amendment of the
charter giving us minimum amount of time
for doing that I know we tossed it back
and forth um
yeah so you I yeah I think you brought
that up in public speak which was a
great idea so you're suggesting that we
consider that as a new item is that what
you're
saying right so you know if that were
included in the in the minute so I'm
just asking that that be added to
minut uh let me jump in here I mean yeah
we mentioned that we kicked it around
considerably during public speak and
then we said okay we're going to circle
around and put this in in the discussion
and possible action uh line item and
then we never did so
um Bob to that end actually um because I
was working on the percent to referendum
and automatic referendum vote stuff um
and I also know there was some
discussion pre
pre previously regarding
um um
you know uh minor minor ordinances major
ordinances and um emergency ordinances I
included I just sent everybody a
document that
has um it has
the how it's handled in in a couple
other towns mostly though that's that's
a Hein document um and how they their
wording is much much cleaner than our
Charter is um regarding um sending
something to you know petitioning as
well as um how the how the ordinance is
held uh you know how you how you trigger
their meeting and also emergency
ordinances so um I would I would think
we we might want to actually just
consider literally copying pasting that
into our section because it's way
okay Rec we I'd recommend we we adop we
we motion to accept these minutes and
and add Carol's item as a sort of to
this block of business is sort of part
of new business yeah you're echoing what
I was about to say you just jumped in
before I could and the same thing Adrian
so yeah let's let's get the uh the
minutes out of the way and then go to
the next item where we can accommodate
these things so are there any uh other
can you I guess you don't need to bring
the minutes back onto the screen are
there any other discussions
contributions changes revisions that
anybody sees necessary in the minutes
somebody want to make a motion to accept
them I'll make a motion to accept with
the one
month not right last comments section
I'm sorry I'll make the motion to
approve the minutes um with adding
making that one correction adding uh
that sentence that I we discussed last
week for adding to section 10008
under the public speak under the public
right right
okay I'll second that any further
discussion yes then why not sit there
and put everybody in public
speak I I'm just saying Carol I mean
just from a simple standpoint I know you
brought it up in public speak
but is that the only part of public
speak we're going to put in the
minutes bring the minutes back no no no
no no no we don't have to I'm just
making a comment there's no other issues
on public speak in the
minutes no I I just thought we discussed
it after public speak when we were in
our meeting part no we discussed it in
public speak I I think Jeff perhaps the
only reason to memorialize it is because
it was significant enough that we spent
10 or 15 minutes kicking that one idea
around and it seems like something that
is now migrating into the general agenda
so it seems substantial enough put it in
if we had an agenda we would make an
addition to bring it up into new
business and sit there and say I mean I
know we have an agenda but we don't have
any items on it we don't have addition
deletions it's probably a special
meeting Carol I don't know but it's fine
just approve the minutes and with
Carol's addition but I'm just saying if
I'm someone like
Shan and I spoke in public speak and
you're not putting anything else in
public speak I would be semi concerned
and it would be problematic to me
so um let's just
vote okay all those in
favor I any
opposed okay Carri 600
Z abstain I wasn't here okay Carol from
an administrative perspective can you
add that sentence to the document I sent
and then
publish good thank
you all right so let's go on to the
catchall agenda item discussion and
possible action upon any Charter
revision issue um before we get into
some of the details I just wanted to uh
kind of confer with everybody where are
we Visa the schedule for getting this
all done I know at the first meeting we
talked about how the schedule seemed
pretty tight we only had a certain
number of meetings we needed to get this
presented we needed to get a draft over
to the board of Selectmen before a
certain amount of time there was some
discussion about uh going back to the
board of Selectmen and extending the
schedule was that ever done
Jeff yes we extended it out for an extra
two weeks or little more than two weeks
so it's about the 22nd of July 22nd of
July is when we need to get the the
draft so well the hope is that we get
the draft to them a lot sooner than this
I mean the issue that I look at is we've
had issues with the town attorney the
town attorney is not present at our
meeting he's got some personal issues
he's dealing with but hopefully what we
can do is just address all the items get
the the details laid out and then
provide it back to him so that he can
sit there and do the legal e for us and
then hand it back to everybody so that
we can read it at Future meetings and
move on quickly so sooner is better
correct okay thank you anybody else any
have any questions about
that um we mentioned the public speak
because I had made a note to myself that
we should come back to that um just
again touching base on things Carol and
I still need to get together on the
formalized itemized list of of what the
items are and uh so
maybe early next week we can do
that
um and at some point we're going to take
all of uh the each member's changes and
incorporate them into a single document
obviously um right now we've got a lot
of things floating around and I guess
that's that's something that Carol and I
will be looking at
also all right those that's just some
bookkeeping things that I had uh made
notes
of uh that brings us to uh the things
that we didn't talk about last week are
Adrian's things Adrien we're grateful to
have you back um there were two items
that you had uh volunteer to look at the
the town clerk position and the
supplemental appropriation amount so
take it away in any order that you
want yeah so actually on my notes I had
that I had three
um percentage of
referendum um to automatically
percentage of budget to automatically go
to
referendum um uh dollar amount um or
percentage for referendum you know uh
for uh people discussing it you know
sorry petitioned um and the uh and the
town clerk
language um so basically I'll get the I
think the easiest one get off the table
as the town clor language um and you
know again I I have looked at this in
most towns you know contrary to to what
our public speak most towns um are going
to an appointed position for a variety
of reasons um it's just uh it it's
become such a a busy position in a in a
professional position it really it's
really where it belongs you would not
want to elect someone and then uh
give them four years and to to learn the
position and then you they start over
someone someone else could then come in
and start it over so at any rate it
really is a non-political position so um
I looked at the language in four
different Chargers and what I'm finding
is that
um most folks do not reference State
statues directly because there are so
many of them um they generally now are
with an appointed position they have
some sort of transition language if it
was recent so I put in some transition
language there for us which basically
says that um you know the uh that
whoever is the elected town clerk when
this transition happens if they're still
in the position when the next the end of
their term comes they would then become
the appointed town clerk if they so
choose um and otherwise they would the
town would follow the procedures that
are set for forth um by Statute to you
know to um to notify the secretary of
state that they're going to appoint
someone and then go through the process
of hiring now in
our in our current Town Charter we
already have a section section o which
was reserved for uh the town clerk's
position it were it to become an A A A
Town employee position so I gave you
language to put into that section and
basically it just copied the other
positions that are protected in the
charter currently um that the board of
Select would appoint a town
clerk have all the duties and Powers
conferred by concut
Statute the appointment will come from
the highest candidate chosen on the
basis of comp competitive
examination office would have a
permanent status the officer shall be
compensated on a salary basis only town
clerk will be a town employee subject to
all rules and Provisions Personnel
polities removal of town clerk must be
for Just Cause And it must be confirmed
by a four fist vote 80% of the entire Bo
of selectman um and that Maks the
policies we already have in the charter
for other positions our
Charter um and you know really most
other Town
Charters um really don't even address it
at this point through various revisions
um you know
Columbia um heurn is is going through
the process again now so I borrowed some
of their language for the transition
language um but most of the other Town
Charters do not even really adjust it
just saying that it's in a it's in a all
pointed position that's it
so questions on
that I would put forward a motion that
we move to have our town clerk
appointed and following I haven't
reviewed the language but the general
concept I think is to have an appointed
town
clerk I would second the
motion further
discussion so the assumption is that the
language or the the bullet points Adrian
that you're addressing are going to be
addressed by the town attorney and the
language specified out so everybody is
clear with what we're talking about I
actually sent uh everyone should have in
their email the language um but yes it
is uh I I sent it out just as the
meeting was starting I I apologize and I
will say if anyone feels the need to
edit I sent it as a word doc
unfortunately my
um my my abilities to edit have been
greatly reduced um I mostly have to use
a a voice uh a voice detex type program
right now so it's um I haven't quite
figured out how to edit really well with
it so any helps appreciate if somebody
feels the need but I I basically
followed our town Charter and just you
know addressed it the same literally cut
and paste language from what we already
have and then filled in from other other
Town stuff so what you're saying is you
took the Town Administrator language and
rolled it into no we have actually one
in there for the assessor um and a
couple other positions that are that are
mimic it mimics that language exactly as
far as
702 702 yes thank
you
okay and we already had a section
reserved for it 702 in its o section
no at the very bottom of the document I
sent
I don't have the whole Charter open in
front of me do we have for those other
hired positions like the assessor and
the Town Administrator do we have
additional language on what has to
happen to get rid of them I mean yeah I
copied that exactly
okay right removal okay for Just Cause
yeah four fifths gotcha
I just opened the document also yeah
okay I apologize for the late it took me
unfortunately a long time to put that
together oh it's great that you had this
okay so you're you're echoing the
existing language for other hired
positions yes hired administrative
position yes yeah that's
consistent any other question or
discussions so we have a motion to
accept this and seconded let's vote all
in
favor I I I I'm abstaining Carol's
abstaining Adrian are you voting yes or
no I I I yes yes
um all
opposed okay yeah I
see I really think that um as Sharon
said have it open to the
public the elected
offici all right so we have a vote of
four one one one exstension one opposed
four uh agreeing so the motion carries
okay so that will be included in our
list of items to move forward thank you
Adrien and the other items I see are
also in your document
here yes yes so um I I brought over some
stuff on you know basically again Hein
is much cleaner
on how they address their
hearings um they basically use a 2% um
2%
electors um as the requirement and then
they have a you know they have a
timeline um I basically used that and
then put in the timeline that we had all
talked about um at our on our previous
meeting that I was at so
um but otherwise the document is is
fairly fairly straightforward as far as
um it gives a a progression you know how
do you trigger it you know how do you
how do you trigger petition town meeting
how do you you know how long does the
ordinance hold over exactly all that is
addressed it's pretty pretty much what
we had talked about um they're just
their language is cleaner and I put in
um um I put in
um the totality of it because I felt
like it just it's so much cleaner how it
it play everything just it's very
concise how it's noticed where it's
noticed how long it's noticed for
so I'm sorry what was that for uh
referendum yes percentage uh percentage
um the sor the um percentage to trigger
um to trigger a special petition to then
go to a town meeting
referendum so you're you're suggesting
we follow
hein's language and hein's percentage is
that right um I looked around and and
most towns are kind of right at that 2%
Mark so
yes seems to be the consensus that 2% is
the TR
so Jeff you're
muted hey um ajan what time did you send
out that email because I cannot find it
I'm looking at Town email address I'm
looking at my office business email
address can't pull up that other screen
right now someone look at the email
address and just see if I'm included or
I'm just before the meeting though yeah
I got it at
604 okay so it's just sorry but I think
you BCC because I don't see any other uh
email
addresses well I can you I tried to
reply all I'm so sorry can you send it
to me yeah I think you just sent it to
me
Adrian Bob is it possible for you to
report it to everybody it just for me to
switch screens is sure
uh that's fine and
and um listen I I had been looking at
the the language on e as well
and that language is acceptable to to to
sit there and go forward as far as
referendum goes because there's two
different issues it's like what is
the um what is a special Mee or special
town meeting going to be called for
Adrian like what would it be called for
so it can I mean technically it can be
called for anything that is deemed
appropriate within our
so we you know um I would have to go
through our Charter to find the section
that references it specifically but it
can be it can be purchase of town
properties it can be um it can be in
this case repeal of an ordinance that
was that was passed that they dis that
the town folks May disagree with
um some Charters
specifically um list everything and some
say um have a a little bit
more vagueness in
it okay and the the reason why I was
looking at that section especially for
referendum was related to
ordinance right or or ordinance is
addressed in this specifically as a hold
you know and then it and then if it goes
to the it goes to a special meeting and
it says that it has to pass by a certain
percentage then it automatically is
effective as of the the next day of the
meeting
okay uh I'll need to see it because from
my end it's the reasons why and trying
to
avoid calling of special Town meetings
and having the additional cost and
additional um time required to sit there
and get to those Town meetings and to
maximize the number of residents that
are participating so that was the goal
that what you missed last week it
released with the ordinance issue was to
get it to a referendum so that the
majority of the Town voters will
participate right so okay should be
hitting your inbox okay thank you Bob so
so to that end I guess the two things
that we probably should try to look at
is does our Charter have Provisions
specifically for what a town meeting has
to has to or can be called for
right yes and and it does and the goal
and Carol will know more even than I do
but what I'm sitting there after is if
we the goal on my section the goal was
the ordinances
were drafted by the the board of
Selectmen and then the referendums would
be called strictly for the ordinances we
have nothing Carol in our Charter
related to referendum calling right now
it's just special Town meetings right
exactly so correct okay right so that
actually is the third thing that you
asked me to look at is um automatic
dollar Mount to going for referendum and
um that was was that going to referendum
or going to town meeting because now
we're confusing we got the whole we got
the whole pod confused we already we
already have we already have a provision
that a town meeting happens with a was
it's like one half a percent or
something so correct and we were looking
at increasing that number so to 50,000
yeah that's still 1 half% of the number
I it's not even 1 half% of the number so
are we sticking at a half are we trying
to say we're going to stick at half
percent are we going to go 2% are we
going to go to $100,000 I mean I would
rather be a flat number than anything
percentage wise because then people
understand it yeah we had discussed we
had discussed I mean I went back to the
minutes that we had had previously from
two meetings ago um and that's what I um
but anyways I think that number should
be um you know that should be somewhere
in the neighborhood of 200,000 from what
I can see um most towns most towns
actually are just not doing the town
meeting part of it they go straight to
referendum on on on these things so they
they give their Board of Finance more
leeway to to do things on the lower end
and then when it breaks a when it breaks
a threshold they kick it you know they
have a setle um whether it's a half a
percent or 1% where they automatically
kick it to referendum they do not go to
a town meeting they just go straight to
referendum and they're done with
it
so just so
I'm listen if you want to say $200,000
and you want to try to go at that that's
fine I think the current number
currently right and and I'm just going
to do basic math for everybody and Carol
please correct me if I'm wrong it's it's
the budget less
Ram yes so it's some somewhere in the
range of
of $8 million and I'm just going to
round the numbers because I always look
at four four and four so $8
million times
0.005 is
$40,000 right that's the current number
as established it's a really incredibly
low threshold so basically everything
gets to town meeting at the budget for
the most part and it's $440,000 so if
the number is
$200,000 that's that's
2.5% is that right am I right $8 eight
million
Bob 0025 $2,000 two and a half% hey I
want to jump in here a second and
completely take a r turn on this Adrian
you're what you're submitting here is
stuff that we covered three meetings ago
and that we all agreed to move forward
it was the it was the meeting that um
that Eric Anderson was here we talked
about dollar amounts and percentage
amounts 304a and B and uh and the notes
that I have here what we wanted you to
do
was you had talked about that we needed
a dollar amount for supplemental
Appropriations that would trigger a
referendum vote exactly not revisiting
everything that Eric and I had already
done so I'm a little confused what we're
doing well Bob I don't remember voting
on what you and Eric had done so did we
vote on that because I don't remember
voting on any numbers any percentages
any dollar we just discussed it so far
we've just been discussing most every we
haven't really voted on we voted on a
couple things Carol just a cou I'm
pretty sure that we voted on that yeah
it was 50 Bob it was $50,000 is what you
guys had put up yeah $50,000 well that
was and the question was what's the
number to trigger an automatic
referendum and the answer I'm I'm giving
you is 200,000 if you want a different
number go for it no no that's okay I
mean we didn't have any
language as near is I
understood to automatically trigger a
referendum
we I proposed I proposed a motion I
proposed a motion it did not go and then
you guys suggested that I should come up
with a number that everyone could
because we were kicking around different
numbers and that was I guess the
consensus that it wasn't clarified I
should get some clarification so that's
what I'm trying to put on the table now
yeah where so we have a section in
section 304 is special town meeting
in section 304 we don't have we don't
have one that skips and goes to
referendum we do not got it so this is a
sort of a fresh issue you're working on
which is when does something go to
referendum right it was two meetings ago
when we were talking about um the issues
that Bob were just discussing it was
after Eric but um it was amongst
everyone that was
here Eric was not Eric was not at that
particular meeting okay then I'm I'm
going to sit there and say that I'm I
need some clarification because there
are issues in our town meeting procedure
um as to percentages and dollar figures
in the document actually just
percentages there's no dollar
figures can we vote on that because I
would like to understand like I that's
what I thought we were coming back
to is any supplemental appropriation
it's
it's two
304b yeah that's for town meeting yeah
to meeting and then and then I think we
need to think about them in concert too
right the notion of what goes to meeting
what goes to referendum yeah right um so
I think it's I think it's it is sort of
a collective
issue what right you're saying Bob you
changed it to what percent so at the
meeting with thing but but we're talking
about this I'm just saying I don't
remember voting on anything like this we
did because I've got a note of it it was
uh okay what meeting date was it I would
have captured the
motion okay so let's Express 304b what
what because Adrian we haven't
eliminated the town meeting so if what
would ever get to $200,000
if we set the the special town meeting
supplemental appropriation at even 1%
even 1% is not going to get to the
$200,000 so
um I was bringing this up specifically
and what started the back and forth is I
you know I pointed out that the tractor
passed you know by eight votes and that
76 people decided basically to spend
nearly you know nearly a mill on a
tractor and it's and I and I have a
problem with that and I brought this up
and you guys said well they come up with
a number got it so your your suggest so
it does make sense that one would be
higher than the other right you're yes
is sort of bringing it to in your
thinking Adrian bringing it to town
referendum is bringing it directly to
everyone in a town when you you start
spending a certain amount quick town you
know the board of Selectmen can do up to
whatever and then it goes to a town
meeting might be the next threshold
whether that's that 0.5 or Jeff is I
think suggesting maybe something higher
and then you were kind of saying 200,000
could be that's when everyone in the
town should have a voice yes got it I
mean a simple guy here but maybe up and
and I'm just spitballing here you know
maybe up to
$100,000 would be appropriate for some
wiggle room for the people we've elected
to do supplemental work
and then and then anything over 200,000
you know anything over that 100,000
needs to go to a town meeting and then
anything over 200 might need to go
to the the
referendum so on June 4th we did vote
exactly for special Town meetings so a
the issuance of bonds exceeding
50,000 B exceed exceeding 1%
% uh we kept C we kept D and then e
leases we put in a dollar amount of in
excess of
50,000 f um
0.25 which that is exactly the same as
it
currently right what did we say for B
Carol 1%
one yes okay so we got it we're
80,000 we upped it right we upped that
one and then
um the application um for any in kind we
up that to 25,000 from the current
2500 and that
was motion to modified was Adrian
seconded by Jeff and carried
unan go I'm I'm losing my mind yeah now
I remember that that this was Bob and
Eric they kind of redlined they brought
it up they walked us through it the
first thing that we covered Jeff you so
five years from now when we see these
dollar values are we going to be going
what were those people thinking why
aren't they doing
percentages no I I I just think I mean I
think it's just easier to do a round
number so so people can read it and
understand when it
goes I see Pat you're not in your head
that makes sense to you too real
numbers unfortunately we didn't do that
with the other one we did 1% but with
Adrian suggesting what goes to a town
referendum he's suggesting a flat dollar
okay and and just so we're clear Adrien
the the what we passed on the tractor
which you're upset about is a fiveyear
commitment for 2 $50,000 it's not a
$250,000 commitment at one time that's
not is it an annual is it an annual
commitment or is a long-term commitment
no it's it's it's the same I would use
the same language we're using for the
other um so for instance we have a we we
agreed on language for you know grant
money right so with grant money it's not
you're shaking your head did we not
agree on language no no no no I'm
shaking my head over things in the back
of my head I'm like going I need a I
mean Bob we need a list of things that
we did approve or not approve like a a
running list I mean I'm just in my head
gone there's a a few things Adrian that
um I'm not clear on in my mind like I
understand what you're saying now I do
understand what you're saying now I
understand what Bob is saying now we're
sitting saying town meeting
to kind town
meeting is 1% of
anything over 1% for a supplemental
appropriation right now would go to town
meetings so that in essence is
$80,000 and and what you're trying to
sit there and say here is anything at
that Maxes that is a total commitment of
$200,000 for the town has to go to refer
straight to referendum right no town
meeting straight to referendum call to
day okay
supplemental unbudgeted right that's the
exactly exactly you know Jeff how often
are these like is this rare is this is
it always it's just a qu dollar dollar
value a little more frequently it's not
frequently but it one have we not done
have we not done one almost every
year name it go
ahead I'm saying haven't we done one
almost every year no Community Center
tractor listen we Center tractor we did
the tractor
Bridge what are you talking about we
didn't spend any money on the bridges
bridg we originally we originally did
actually have to commit money for
funding because you have to put money in
and then we ended up getting we ended up
getting 100% Grant but that originally
only the only the only the only
legitimate supplemental appropriation is
the
tractor and and when I say supplemental
I am talking a not an infrastructure
issue that the town is really committed
to it's it's something that we did that
was an equipment issue that we had to
sit there and go do right most of these
Adrian and you will admit will come up
during the budget cycle this one should
come
up a they should I agree they should so
then the so what he suggest what Adrian
suggesting doesn't sound like an undo
burden we're not you know maybe once a
year once every three years we might go
if something's needed in the town and
the leadership goes gosh this didn't hit
the budget cycle we need something it's
a little bit of protection for the town
outside the B outside the budget process
where um um you know there there's some
you know voice of the town if there's a
higher dollar item right corre it went
this indiv this one went to town meeting
right went to town meeting it was a well
attended town meeting and got voted in a
different direction that Adrian is
looking at I will tell you if I'm on
that board I'm on the board I would
never put that up for a supplemental the
only reason this even went up Jody was
because there was an opportunity to get
a tractor that was sitting there that if
we waited till past June we would never
have gotten so that's the only reason so
so you're spending two and a half% of
our budget without any voice from the no
sorry you allowed the you had the Town
come to a meeting and how many people in
town attended 76 76 one of the better
attended Town meetings I've seen yeah I
mean I guess the concept of I mean I
don't maybe it's $500,000 but there
should be a concept where something big
is gonna happen I don't know what the
threshold is right you need more of the
Town than than and I guess and I guess
you know Jeff disagrees with me on this
and that's fine but my issue is if the
meeting was noticed it was on short
notice but even once it was noticed
there was no packet on the town website
that had all the information you got it
literally you got to pack it at the
meeting because there was nothing
available online there was no none of
the competitive stuff that was given to
the board of selectman was provided it
wasn't even in the in the packets so
people went to a meeting uninformed and
made a decision based on what people
said at a meeting and unfortunately are
well I'm not going to get into it Adrian
those are legitimate concerns but
they're really separate from what we're
discussing here right now right but my
point is there is a reason for having
this and it's really just about getting
giving the Town folk more of a
participation okay I don't understand
exactly so let me let me just play
stupid here so by having the town
meeting we I mean that was the way that
the decision was made that's our
legislative body and at the same time we
were soliciting discussion and input so
we could see how people in real time
were uh were responding to this now if
you're talking about for large dollar
amounts going to referendum going to a
vote is that going to be following a
town meeting is it going to be following
a hearing or is there going to be some
vehicle for soliciting public feedback
before we go to the referendum well the
referendum is public feedback right the
the just like on anything else it's one
directional it's not interactive the way
that you need a public hearing you would
need a public hearing to discuss but the
board of selectman has the public
hearing on these things right so do the
board of finance and then they send it
to a town
meeting you mean to referendum you're
talking about SK no I'm saying currently
currently we do that and then go to a
town meeting right right that you would
do that and go You' skip the town
meeting go straight for referendum and
the reason is that a referendum if I'm
correct Carol is open from what 8 AM to
800 PM or 6 AM to 8 6 AM to 8m we could
change it noon to
800m um so so in instead of town folks
getting 5 days notice to show up at an
in-person meeting at 7:00 on a
Tuesday they can actually stop in
throughout the day and at any point
during that day after they drop their
kids off at school before they bring
their kids to soccer practice before
they we have a lot of elderly folks that
don't want to drive in the evening you
know there's a lot of reasons for doing
this and most of it are around
participation that's all it is and they
can also get apps and te belts so I do
agree with Adrien giving the public more
of a chance to voice their opinion they
can they have referendums usually happen
under three weeks notice but absentee
ballots are available
so you have more of the voice of rather
than limiting them to that one night you
know couple hour meeting if they do have
prior commit again A lot of times Adrian
is correct isely short notice and this p
one that we had the end of April was
extremely short it's interesting Carol
that you would use the the language
giving the public a voice because I see
the referendum by itself as less of a
voice it's a one directional yes you can
get more people involved but there's
less of the the interactive that there
is in the town meeting and that's why I
was asking now before this town meeting
was there a special
hearing or did this just go there was
nothing it just um we just sent the
notices out the week before on that
Monday and then the meeting was
falling right so you would need to have
a public hearing before going to
referendum you would not our Charter
said that if the board of Selectmen or
Board of Finance were looking for a
supplemental appropriation and let's say
that we use Adrian's 200,000 00 for the
threshold if it was 250 then it would
automatically be forced to go to
refence but if Bob if that's what you're
looking for I can figure out language
for that to say that you know for a
dollar amounts over this amount we'll
have a you know the board of Selectmen
or Board of Finance the you know that
that's asking for this would have to
have a public hearing and then it would
go directly to referendum once they they
conclude that
hearing I don't know that we're really
achieving anything by doing that
two-step process versus a public hearing
versus a a a town meeting excuse
me you
know well you're definitely you're
definitely accomplishing something you
know you're accomplishing something I
mean I have no problem with what Adrien
is requesting what I'm trying to do is
get the logistics of the numbers so if I
have a 1% for a town meeting I have 40 I
have I have $80,000 right and I'm just
going to use that number so what Adrian
is saying anything any supplemental
appropriation between eight currently in
our Charter the way our Charter
$80,000 goes to town
meeting anything in excess of
$200,000 goes directly to
referendum I don't have a problem with
that and Bob I don't have a problem with
saying
before it goes a referendum you have to
hold a public hearing put it in the
document put it in the charter hold a
public hearing before it goes a
referendum and then let everybody vote
on it if you choose to that that that's
there's nothing wrong with what he's
what Adrian is suggesting what I'm what
I'm trying to do is what is the what are
the numbers that we're talking about
here so we're talking
$80,000 and and above goes to a town
meeting anything between 80,000 and 199
goes to a town meeting anything above1
199999 goes to a
referendum
yes how about it I mean it's a it's
a I I I would sit there and say I I
don't have a problem with something like
the tractor going to a referendum I have
a problem with road work or something
along that lines but that wouldn't be a
supplemental appropriation that would be
in the budget right this this this item
with the tractor was a total off issue
so I don't have a
problem okay I
don't so but those are the numbers the
numbers are you have you have language
for a new ref Town referendum section
and in that section I can put I can put
together language for this I did not
okay put it together yet because it was
again it was this kind of discussion
last time and there was not a consensus
so I didn't want to I was trying to
focus on getting the other things done
with the limited amount of time that I
had
available so if if Bob are you are you
yay or nay on this no I you know like I
said I I think it's important for the
town to have a voice in it and by a
voice I mean the interactive process for
either a uh you know a special hearing
or a town meeting um it seems like we're
going to a two-step process here where
the town special town meeting is kind of
a one-step process so in that regard
it's two things we have to schedule it's
twice the expense to the town but if no
because the hearing the hearing could be
at a regular board selectman meeting it
doesn't have to be you know granted okay
you know from a logistical standpoint I
agree with that public hearing doesn't
cost any money you have to notice Mee
the T meeting costs money because you
have to check everybody's license and we
have to pay for the register of Voters
to be there and so Town Town public
hearing no problem public hearing done
anything with you have to notice it
though I mean
that's
um we notice Carol Carol notices every
Board of Select me meaning we have five
people show up okay I'm good with it you
know Jody
thoughts I'm on board I like the stepped
approach right we we're trying to give
our elected leaders a little bit more
latitude we increased it from half to 1%
that's a step maybe not enough but
that's done business and this is kind of
like anything between you know that H 1%
200,000 is a town meeting and then
anything over 200,000 really everyone in
Town's gonna you know has has an opport
it's it's that referendum so yes I'm I'm
finding with sort of this step wised
approach yeah I'll work on the language
for the next meeting and I I will
apologize in advance for giving you
short on this but I will hopefully be in
a better place this coming week and I
I'll get this to you much sooner okay
that's great Adrien what you've done is
is terrific some good ideas here um
let's go back are we voting on this or
not are we ready to because to me
because to me language language is I I'm
not an attorney and there's a reason why
we have a attorney in my head so I'm not
an attorney but I am understanding are
you wanting to wait on this until Adrien
proposes language is that the goal
though yes okay then fine let's have
something here that we can all look at
that we can look at more than you know
two minutes before we're trying to vote
on it so we can digest it sure no
problem I will I will get it to
everybody um the at least Monday before
next Tuesday's meeting okay okay
um so we had started three weeks ago
four weeks ago with a list of of items
which yes I haven't I haven't circulated
which things we've checked off but we
have gone through made a first pass at
everything and we've circulated around
there's been a lot of documents flying
around with everybody's changes I think
what needs to happen now is for Carol
and I to put all these things together
into one attachment that can all look at
next week go through quickly and say
yeah yeah yeah I mean I have that we
have voted on most of these things
already but we need I think we need to
see them all in context and together and
that should be what we do next week
because we've done a first pass on
everything at this
point I mean I know in my head we've
talked about everything I just don't
know which ones we voted on and which
ones we proved so I do remember Eric in
a discussion of 1% do remember that I
you know and and I think the logic of
voting on that was it's as jod said an
increased but it's not an excessive
increase but what adrianne's language is
now breathing breathing to us it's it's
$80,000 for a town
meeting and $200,000 for a town
referendum logic so let's go Common
Sense okay that's everything that I had
for us to
discuss all the items like I said it's
it's up to Carol and I to kind of get
this all together so that we can look at
it in context together and uh that's
where we're going to go then is there
some structure to send this to the board
of
Selectmen the town attorney I think
talked about different items in
different ways right so I know there's a
process and maybe this Jeff this is
something for you to opine on but I
think you know is it or nay we like
these or there are seven changes and
they could vote they could approve or
deny seven one through seven so there
could be a partial acceptance I don't I
don't I don't 100% recall that process
well Carol Carol and Patricia were on
the the last Charter revision commission
so they understand that there's a draft
report that's going to go in front of
the board of Selectmen and and if I
remember the last draft there was uh
three or four items and we approved all
all the items that were on that draft
but I would assume that we would go
through the same process we would get to
a point where we're comfortable with
what were the points we're trying to
move forward with you'd give it to the
town attorney the town attorney would
come back with language that would be
appropriate for the for the state of
Connecticut and then it would go to the
board of Selectmen and the board of
selectman's going to either approve the
draft or not approve the draft and then
it would come back to us Carol correct
for we do have to have a public hearing
once we once we feel that we're
completed that public has an additional
chance for their
input before we
send okay couldn't couldn't hear the
last few things you said there Carol I'm
sorry so we have to have a public
hearing once we're we feel that we're
done we've made all of our motions voted
on what we're going to send forward to
the board of Selectmen we have another
public hearing and then that public
hearing someone may present something
and we may want to modify before we send
it
to
so and then they would decide whether or
not to send all of the items that we
have sent
forward as questions for Charter
changing and Carol before that public
hearing did you have the draft completed
with the town attorney like the language
that you were potentially sending to the
board of
Selectmen did not no okay okay okay so
we complete a draft we have a public
hearing we we put that in front of the
public that we solicit inputs we may or
may not edit the draft and then we
submit it to the board of
Selectmen they vote up down or sideways
is they have the capability to make
changes send it back to
us think I don't think we have the
ability I mean I'm speaking on of the
board of Select I don't believe we have
the authority to make changes we can
make recommendations back to you and
where we can sit there and say we don't
approve this item in the draft um right
tell you what to do it's just
recommendations listen we don't believe
that this is good for the community
please revise blah blah BL right I'm
assuming I'm assuming though that just
my mind this has to get to the town
attorney sooner than later to have
appropriate language it does you have to
have Den language and correct any
mistakes that you may have made
technical things that you know because
like first selectman goes through the
entire draft if we decided to say
something first selectman is gone and
we're going to call it first select
member um it goes through a lot of the
pages of the draft of the charter so
anyway yes sooner than later so all of
this sooner than later
so the package would be great Bob I
mean all
right okay um I think that's all of the
discussion and possible actions that we
have for this week
um anybody have anything that they want
to throw in before we move on to the
second public
speak nope okay so we're on to item five
public
speak
um you have any other members of the
public here Zoom login whoever that
is I don't
know uh hi hi folks sorry I had to
interrupt the my name is John gusowski I
don't know if I've met some of you I'm
the town planner um Planning and Zoning
is actually waiting on this same Zoom
feed for some reason the town only has
one Zoom feed so their meeting which was
supposed to start at 7 is is is waiting
for you folks but obviously you had it
first so take your time well we actually
have two Zoom feeds and we're using the
secondary one that's the one that we
were kind of assigned right from the
start because there is a primary listen
listen I'll make a motion that we
adjourn
good job love you all right
okay thank you unanimous you us all
right thank you guys see you thanks by
bye everybody y